\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename org-comments.info
@settitle Org Comments Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Org Comments: (org-comments). Org-native comments with backend-ready storage.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Org Comments Manual
@author Hubert Behaghel
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Org Comments Manual
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::                 What org-comments provides.
* Getting Started::              Installing and enabling org-comments.
* Concepts::                     The package vocabulary and data model.
* Local Org Sidecars::           Local storage format and behavior.
* Comment UI::                   Modes, panels, and default interaction model.
* Backends::                     Backend registry and operations.
* Confluence Backend::           How Confluence integrates with org-comments.
* Migration::                    Migrating legacy metadata.
* Commands::                     Generated command reference.
* Customization::                Generated defcustom reference.
* Keybindings::                  Generated keybinding reference.
* Developer API::                Extension seams for backends and UIs.
* Troubleshooting::              Common problems and fixes.

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Getting Started

* Requirements::
* Installation from a checkout::
* Minimal workflow::

Concepts

* Source buffers and sidecars::
* Anchors::
* Page comments::
* Collaboration state::

Backends

* Identity resolution::

Keybindings

* Org buffers::
* Comment panel::
* Page comments panel::

Troubleshooting

* No comments appear::
* Legacy sidecar error::
* Remote operation is unsupported::
* Info manual is missing::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@samp{org-comments} adds review comments to Org buffers while keeping the source
Org text clean.  Local comments are stored in colocated @samp{.comments.org}
sidecar files.  Remote systems such as Confluence can register backends for
comment synchronization, remote opening, push, and pull operations.

The package is intentionally backend-neutral.  Its core model describes comment
identity, target text, replies, local draft state, remote state, sync state,
people identity, and actionability without requiring a specific provider.
Confluence is one backend; Google Docs or another review system can implement
the same protocol later.

This manual is written as an Emacs Info manual.  After building it, browse it
with @samp{C-h i m org-comments RET}.

@node Getting Started
@chapter Getting Started

@menu
* Requirements::
* Installation from a checkout::
* Minimal workflow::
@end menu

@node Requirements
@section Requirements

@itemize
@item
Emacs with Org mode available.
@item
A writable directory next to each commented Org source file for local
sidecar files.
@item
Optional backend packages for remote providers, such as @samp{org-confluence}.
@end itemize

@node Installation from a checkout
@section Installation from a checkout

Add the package directory to @samp{load-path} and require the package:

@lisp
(add-to-list 'load-path "/path/to/org-comments")
(require 'org-comments)
@end lisp

Then enable @samp{org-comments-mode} in Org buffers.  This minor mode is the main
user entry point for commands, keybindings, and overlays:

@lisp
(add-hook 'org-mode-hook #'org-comments-mode)
@end lisp

For a commands-only setup without inline/page markers, set
@samp{org-comments-enable-overlays} before enabling the mode:

@lisp
(setq org-comments-enable-overlays nil)
(add-hook 'org-mode-hook #'org-comments-mode)
@end lisp

@node Minimal workflow
@section Minimal workflow

@enumerate
@item
Open an Org file.
@item
Enable @samp{org-comments-mode}.
@item
Select a region and run @samp{M-x org-comments-create}.
@item
Open the side panel with @samp{M-x org-comments-open}.
@item
Navigate comments with @samp{org-comments-next} and @samp{org-comments-previous}.
@end enumerate

See *note Commands:: and *note Keybindings:: for the generated reference.

@node Concepts
@chapter Concepts

@menu
* Source buffers and sidecars::
* Anchors::
* Page comments::
* Collaboration state::
@end menu

@node Source buffers and sidecars
@section Source buffers and sidecars

A source buffer is the Org document being reviewed.  The default local backend
stores comments in a sibling sidecar whose name ends in @samp{.comments.org}.  For
example, @samp{article.org} uses @samp{article.comments.org}.

Sidecars are ordinary Org files.  Each top-level heading represents a root
comment.  Replies are child headings.  Comment metadata is stored as Org
properties with the @samp{ORG_COMMENTS_} prefix.

@node Anchors
@section Anchors

Inline comments store target text and compact position metadata.  When the
source text changes, @samp{org-comments} can report comments as stale or re-anchor
imported inline comments using exact and fuzzy matching.

@node Page comments
@section Page comments

Page comments are comments about the entire document instead of a specific text
range.  They are represented as footer/page records and can be shown in a page
comments panel.

@node Collaboration state
@section Collaboration state

Backends normalize collaboration metadata into provider-neutral fields:

@itemize
@item
remote identifiers and parent/thread identifiers;
@item
remote state such as present, missing, deleted, or unknown;
@item
local state such as draft, edited, pending push, or push error;
@item
sync state such as clean, dirty, conflict, or error;
@item
resolved and actionable state;
@item
backend-qualified people identity.
@end itemize

See also the backend-neutral model in @samp{../COLLABORATION.md}.

@node Local Org Sidecars
@chapter Local Org Sidecars

The default backend is @samp{org}.  It reads and writes local Org sidecars and does
not require network access.

New sidecar metadata uses only @samp{ORG_COMMENTS_*} properties.  Legacy
@samp{HUB_COMMENT_*} properties are migration input only.  Normal collection reports
legacy sidecars as requiring explicit migration instead of silently reading the
old format.

@node Comment UI
@chapter Comment UI

@samp{org-comments-mode} is the standalone minor mode and the recommended activation
point for users.  It installs Org-native bindings, and when
@samp{org-comments-enable-overlays} is non-nil it also shows overlays for inline
targets and displays page-comment markers.  The default panel is implemented by
@samp{org-comments-panel-mode} and can be replaced or enriched by setting UI adapter
variables.

The package does not install Evil, leader-key, or layout-specific bindings.
Personal keybindings belong in user configuration.

User-facing commands such as @samp{org-comments-open-remote}, @samp{org-comments-push},
@samp{org-comments-reply}, @samp{org-comments-pull}, @samp{org-comments-sync}, and the mark
commands are DWIM: they operate on the current Org source comment when called
from an Org source buffer, and on the current rendered row/source when called
from @samp{org-comments-panel-mode}.

@node Backends
@chapter Backends

Backends register a backend id, capabilities, and operation functions through
@samp{org-comments-register-backend}.  Generic commands detect the active backend
from the current source buffer and dispatch to the backend operation.

Important operations include:

@itemize
@item
list or collect comments;
@item
open the remote comment;
@item
push local comment edits;
@item
pull remote comment state;
@item
sync comments.
@end itemize

Backend @samp{:sync} is comments-only.  It must not perform a full document or page
sync.  Provider packages may offer separate full-document synchronization
commands outside the generic @samp{org-comments} backend contract.

@menu
* Identity resolution::
@end menu

@node Identity resolution
@section Identity resolution

Backends can set @samp{org-comments-resolve-account-id-function} to resolve remote
account IDs into display names for sidecar headings and UI surfaces.  The
callback is called with an account ID and optional directory context, and should
return a display name string or nil.  This keeps provider-specific people stores
outside the generic @samp{org-comments} package.

@node Confluence Backend
@chapter Confluence Backend

The Confluence integration lives in @samp{org-confluence}.  When a source Org buffer
contains @samp{#+CONFLUENCE_PAGE_ID}, the Confluence detector can select the
@samp{confluence} backend for remote comment operations.

The backend supports remote open, push, pull, and comments-only sync.  Full
Confluence page synchronization remains an @samp{org-confluence} responsibility and
is intentionally separate from @samp{org-comments-sync}.

@node Migration
@chapter Migration

Older sidecars may contain @samp{HUB_COMMENT_*} properties.  Run
@samp{org-comments-migrate-sidecar} on one sidecar, or
@samp{org-comments-migrate-directory-sidecars} for a directory of sidecars, to
rewrite those properties to @samp{ORG_COMMENTS_*}.

Migration is explicit by design.  Durable storage should not depend on the
former personal metadata prefix.

@node Commands
@chapter Commands

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Command
@tab Description
@item @samp{org-comments-close-current-ui}
@tab Close the current comments UI using the active close adapter.
@item @samp{org-comments-compact-sidecar-metadata}
@tab Remove obsolete or derivable comment metadata from SIDECAR-FILE@.
@item @samp{org-comments-compose-cancel}
@tab Cancel the current Org comment compose buffer.
@item @samp{org-comments-compose-mode}
@tab Minor mode for composing Org sidecar comments without visiting sidecars.
@item @samp{org-comments-compose-save-draft}
@tab Save the current composed comment as a local draft.
@item @samp{org-comments-compose-submit}
@tab Submit the current composed comment by saving it and closing compose.
@item @samp{org-comments-create}
@tab Create a sidecar comment for region START to END with BODY@.
@item @samp{org-comments-create-from-region}
@tab Create a sidecar comment for the active region.
@item @samp{org-comments-delete}
@tab Delete the comment at point from its sidecar.
@item @samp{org-comments-edit}
@tab Jump to the body of the comment at point.
@item @samp{org-comments-filter-reset-current-ui}
@tab Reset filters in the current comments UI@.
@item @samp{org-comments-filter-status-current-ui}
@tab Show filter status for the current comments UI@.
@item @samp{org-comments-filter-toggle-resolved-current-ui}
@tab Toggle resolved comments in the current comments UI@.
@item @samp{org-comments-help-current-ui}
@tab Show help for the current comments UI using the active help adapter.
@item @samp{org-comments-mark-open}
@tab Mark the current comment open.
@item @samp{org-comments-mark-resolved}
@tab Mark the current comment resolved.
@item @samp{org-comments-mark-todo}
@tab Mark the current comment TODO@.
@item @samp{org-comments-migrate-directory-sidecars}
@tab Explicitly migrate all `.comments.org' sidecars under DIRECTORY@.
@item @samp{org-comments-migrate-sidecar}
@tab Explicitly migrate SIDECAR-FILE from legacy to package-native properties.
@item @samp{org-comments-mode}
@tab Enable Org-native comment commands for the current buffer.
@item @samp{org-comments-next}
@tab Move to the next source comment, wrapping at end of buffer.
@item @samp{org-comments-open}
@tab Open the best available comments UI for the current buffer.
@item @samp{org-comments-open-remote}
@tab Open the current comment in the detected remote backend.
@item @samp{org-comments-open-sidecar}
@tab Open the comments sidecar for the current Org source buffer.
@item @samp{org-comments-overlays-refresh}
@tab Refresh persistent sidecar comment overlays in the current Org buffer.
@item @samp{org-comments-page-create}
@tab Create a page/footer sidecar comment with BODY and edit it.
@item @samp{org-comments-page-open}
@tab Open the page-context window for the current Org buffer.
@item @samp{org-comments-page-panel-open}
@tab Open or refresh the standalone page comments panel for the current source.
@item @samp{org-comments-page-panel-refresh}
@tab Refresh the standalone Org page comments panel.
@item @samp{org-comments-panel-close}
@tab Close the standalone Org comments panel.
@item @samp{org-comments-panel-delete}
@tab Delete the current panel row's sidecar comment and refresh the panel.
@item @samp{org-comments-panel-edit}
@tab Open the current panel row's sidecar comment body for editing.
@item @samp{org-comments-panel-filter-reset}
@tab Reset filters in the current Org comments panel.
@item @samp{org-comments-panel-filter-toggle-resolved}
@tab Toggle display of resolved comments in the current panel.
@item @samp{org-comments-panel-jump}
@tab Jump from the current panel row to its source comment target.
@item @samp{org-comments-panel-mode}
@tab Major mode for the standalone Org comments panel.
@item @samp{org-comments-panel-open}
@tab Open or refresh the standalone Org comments panel for the current source.
@item @samp{org-comments-panel-refresh}
@tab Refresh the standalone Org comments panel.
@item @samp{org-comments-previous}
@tab Move to the previous source comment, wrapping at beginning of buffer.
@item @samp{org-comments-pull}
@tab Pull remote comments through the detected backend.
@item @samp{org-comments-push}
@tab Push the current comment through the detected remote backend.
@item @samp{org-comments-rebuild-mode-map}
@tab Rebuild `org-comments-mode-map' after changing `org-comments-keymap-prefix'.
@item @samp{org-comments-refresh-sidecar-headings}
@tab Refresh all comment headings in SIDECAR-FILE from metadata and body previews.
@item @samp{org-comments-reply}
@tab Create a reply using the best available comments UI@.
@item @samp{org-comments-setup}
@tab Enable `org-comments-mode' in Org buffers.
@item @samp{org-comments-sync}
@tab Synchronize comments for the current Org source or comments panel.
@item @samp{org-context-panel-buffer-mode}
@tab Major mode for generic Org context side panel buffers.
@item @samp{org-context-panel-close}
@tab Close the generic side context panel for the current source.
@item @samp{org-context-panel-close-bottom-view}
@tab Close the generic bottom context view for the current source.
@item @samp{org-context-panel-mode}
@tab Enable reusable Org context-panel mechanics for the current buffer.
@item @samp{org-context-panel-open}
@tab Open or refresh a generic side context panel for SOURCE-BUFFER@.
@item @samp{org-context-panel-open-bottom-view}
@tab Open bottom context view VIEW-ID for SOURCE-BUFFER@.
@item @samp{org-context-panel-open-marker-view}
@tab Open the bottom view associated with the top marker at point.
@item @samp{org-context-panel-refresh}
@tab Refresh the generic side context panel.
@item @samp{org-context-panel-refresh-bottom-view}
@tab Refresh the current generic bottom context view.
@end multitable

@node Customization
@chapter Customization

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Variable
@tab Default
@tab Description
@item @samp{org-comments-author}
@tab @samp{nil}
@tab Author name used for newly created local comments.
@item @samp{org-comments-current-user-id-function}
@tab @samp{ignore}
@tab Function returning the current backend-agnostic person id.
@item @samp{org-comments-default-backend}
@tab @samp{org}
@tab Default backend id used by backend-neutral Org comments commands.
@item @samp{org-comments-enable-overlays}
@tab @samp{t}
@tab Whether `org-comments-mode' shows inline and page comment overlays.
@item @samp{org-comments-heading-body-preview-length}
@tab @samp{60}
@tab Maximum normalized body text length used in comment headings.
@item @samp{org-comments-heading-preview-length}
@tab @samp{60}
@tab Maximum normalized target text length used in sidecar headings.
@item @samp{org-comments-heading-target-preview-length}
@tab @samp{48}
@tab Maximum normalized target text length used in comment headings.
@item @samp{org-comments-keymap-prefix}
@tab @samp{"C-c ;"}
@tab Prefix key for `org-comments-mode' default bindings.
@item @samp{org-comments-page-panel-buffer-name}
@tab @samp{"*Org Page Comments*"}
@tab Buffer name used for the standalone Org page comments panel.
@item @samp{org-comments-panel-buffer-name}
@tab @samp{"*Org Comments*"}
@tab Buffer name used for the standalone Org comments panel.
@item @samp{org-comments-panel-overview-comment-line-length}
@tab @samp{80}
@tab Maximum length of each comment overview line.
@item @samp{org-comments-panel-overview-comment-lines}
@tab @samp{2}
@tab Maximum number of comment body lines shown in comment panel overview rows.
@item @samp{org-comments-panel-target-preview-length}
@tab @samp{20}
@tab Maximum length of quoted comment target previews in comment panels.
@item @samp{org-comments-panel-width}
@tab @samp{38}
@tab Width of the standalone Org comments side window.
@item @samp{org-comments-resolve-account-id-function}
@tab @samp{nil}
@tab Function resolving a remote account id to a display name.
@item @samp{org-comments-resolve-person-function}
@tab @samp{ignore}
@tab Function resolving a backend user id to a person plist.
@item @samp{org-comments-ui-compose-reply-function}
@tab @samp{nil}
@tab Function used by `org-comments-reply' to compose a comment reply.
@item @samp{org-comments-ui-open-comment-function}
@tab @samp{nil}
@tab Function used to open an inline comment by id from an `org-comment:' link.
@item @samp{org-comments-ui-open-function}
@tab @samp{nil}
@tab Function used by `org-comments-open' to open a rich comments UI@.
@item @samp{org-comments-ui-page-open-comment-function}
@tab @samp{nil}
@tab Function used to open a page comment by id from an `org-comment:' link.
@item @samp{org-comments-ui-page-open-function}
@tab @samp{nil}
@tab Function used by `org-comments-page-open' to open page comments.
@item @samp{org-comments-ui-refresh-function}
@tab @samp{nil}
@tab Function used after comment mutations to refresh visible UI state.
@end multitable

@node Keybindings
@chapter Keybindings

@menu
* Org buffers::
* Comment panel::
* Page comments panel::
@end menu

@node Org buffers
@section Org buffers

@float Table,org4e6b49d
@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Command
@item @samp{C-c ; D}
@tab @samp{org-comments-pull}
@item @samp{C-c ; O}
@tab @samp{org-comments-open-remote}
@item @samp{C-c ; P}
@tab @samp{org-comments-page-create}
@item @samp{C-c ; S}
@tab @samp{org-comments-sync}
@item @samp{C-c ; U}
@tab @samp{org-comments-push}
@item @samp{C-c ; c}
@tab @samp{org-comments-create}
@item @samp{C-c ; d}
@tab @samp{org-comments-delete}
@item @samp{C-c ; e}
@tab @samp{org-comments-edit}
@item @samp{C-c ; m o}
@tab @samp{org-comments-mark-open}
@item @samp{C-c ; m r}
@tab @samp{org-comments-mark-resolved}
@item @samp{C-c ; m t}
@tab @samp{org-comments-mark-todo}
@item @samp{C-c ; n}
@tab @samp{org-comments-next}
@item @samp{C-c ; o}
@tab @samp{org-comments-open}
@item @samp{C-c ; p}
@tab @samp{org-comments-previous}
@item @samp{C-c ; r}
@tab @samp{org-comments-reply}
@item @samp{C-c ; s}
@tab @samp{org-comments-open-sidecar}
@end multitable
@caption{org-comments-mode bindings}
@end float

@node Comment panel
@section Comment panel

@float Table,org364d820
@multitable {aaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Command
@item @samp{?}
@tab @samp{org-comments-help-current-ui}
@item @samp{D}
@tab @samp{org-comments-pull}
@item @samp{O}
@tab @samp{org-comments-open-remote}
@item @samp{S}
@tab @samp{org-comments-sync}
@item @samp{U}
@tab @samp{org-comments-push}
@item @samp{g}
@tab @samp{org-comments-panel-refresh}
@item @samp{m o}
@tab @samp{org-comments-mark-open}
@item @samp{m r}
@tab @samp{org-comments-mark-resolved}
@item @samp{m t}
@tab @samp{org-comments-mark-todo}
@item @samp{o}
@tab @samp{org-comments-open-remote}
@item @samp{q}
@tab @samp{org-comments-close-current-ui}
@item @samp{r}
@tab @samp{org-comments-reply}
@item @samp{z ?}
@tab @samp{org-comments-filter-status-current-ui}
@item @samp{z r}
@tab @samp{org-comments-filter-toggle-resolved-current-ui}
@item @samp{z z}
@tab @samp{org-comments-filter-reset-current-ui}
@end multitable
@caption{org-comments-panel-mode bindings}
@end float

@node Page comments panel
@section Page comments panel

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Command
@item @emph{No dedicated page panel keymap yet.}
@tab 
@end multitable

@node Developer API
@chapter Developer API

Use public @samp{org-comments-*} functions for package integration.  Functions with
an @samp{org-comments--} prefix are private implementation details and should not be
called by backend packages.

Important extension areas:

@itemize
@item
backend registration in @samp{org-comments-backend.el};
@item
UI adapter variables in @samp{org-comments-ui.el} and panel action modules;
@item
collaboration normalization in @samp{org-comments-collaboration.el};
@item
explicit migration helpers in @samp{org-comments-migrate.el}.
@end itemize

@node Troubleshooting
@chapter Troubleshooting

@menu
* No comments appear::
* Legacy sidecar error::
* Remote operation is unsupported::
* Info manual is missing::
@end menu

@node No comments appear
@section No comments appear

Check that the source buffer is visiting a file and that the sibling
@samp{.comments.org} file exists.  Local sidecars are file-backed.

@node Legacy sidecar error
@section Legacy sidecar error

If collection reports legacy metadata, run @samp{M-x org-comments-migrate-sidecar}
on the sidecar file and retry.

@node Remote operation is unsupported
@section Remote operation is unsupported

Backends advertise capabilities.  If a backend does not support push, pull,
sync, or remote open, the generic command reports a clear unsupported operation
error.

@node Info manual is missing
@section Info manual is missing

Build the manual from the repository checkout:

@example
devenv -q shell -- docs:org-comments
@end example

Then add the package @samp{docs/} directory to @samp{Info-directory-list} or install the
Info file into your site Info directory.

@bye
